README.md, before:

![banner](https://github.com/abey79/vpype/raw/master/docs/images/banner.png)


# _vpype_

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/vpype?label=PyPI&logo=pypi)](https://pypi.org/project/vpype/)
![python](https://img.shields.io/github/languages/top/abey79/vpype)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/abey79/vpype)](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/license.html)
![Test](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/abey79/vpype/Lint%20and%20Tests?label=Tests&logo=github)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/abey79/vpype/branch/master/graph/badge.svg?token=CE7FD9D6XO)](https://codecov.io/gh/abey79/vpype)
[![Sonarcloud Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=abey79_vpype&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=abey79_vpype)
[![Documentation Status](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/vpype?label=Read%20the%20Docs&logo=read-the-docs)](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

_vpype_ is the Swiss-Army-knife command-line tool for plotter vector graphics.

#### Contents

* [What _vpype_ is?](#what-vpype-is)
* [How does it work?](#how-does-it-work)
* [Examples](#examples)
* [What _vpype_ isn't?](#what-vpype-isnt)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Documentation](#documentation)
* [Feature overview](#feature-overview)
    * [General](#general)
    * [Input/Output](#inputoutput)
    * [Layout and transforms](#layout-and-transforms)
    * [Plotting optimization](#plotting-optimization)
    * [Generation](#generation)
    * [Extensibility and API](#extensibility-and-api)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [License](#license)


## What _vpype_ is?

_vpype_ is the Swiss-Army-knife command-line tool for plotter vector graphics. Here is what it can do:
 - **laying out** existing vector files with precise control on position, scale and page format;
 - **optimizing** existing SVG files for faster and cleaner plots;
 - creating **HPGL output** for vintage plotters;
 - creating **generative artwork** through built-in commands or plug-ins;
 - creating, modifying and processing **multi-layer vector files** for multi-colour plots;
 - and much more...
 
_vpype_ is highly **extensible** through [plug-ins](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/vpype.html#module-vpype) that
can greatly extend its capabilities. For example, plug-ins already exists for plotting
[pixel art](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-pixelart), [half-toning with hatches](https://github.com/abey79/hatched),
[plotting text](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-text) with Hershey fonts,
applying [hidden line removal](https://github.com/LoicGoulefert/occult), and much more.  

_vpype_ is also a [well documented](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api.html) **Python library**
useful to create generative art and tools for plotters. It includes data structures, utility and I/O functions, as well as
a hardware-accelerated flexible viewer for vector graphics. For example, the plotter generative art environment
[vsketch](https://github.com/abey79/vsketch) is built upon _vpype_.

Check the [documentation](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for a more thorough introduction to _vpype_.

## How does it work?

_vpype_ works by building so-called _pipelines_ of _commands_, where each command's output is fed to the next command's input.
Some commands load geometries into the pipeline (e.g. the [`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read)
command which loads geometries from a SVG file). Other commands modify these geometries, e.g. by cropping
them ([`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop)) or reordering them to minimize pen-up
travels ([`linesort`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesort)). Finally, some other commands
just read the geometries in the pipeline for display purposes ([`show`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#show))
or output to file ([`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write)).

Pipeline are defined using the _vpype_'s CLI (command-line interface) in a terminal by typing `vpype` followed by the
list of commands, each with their optional parameters and their arguments:

![command line](https://github.com/abey79/vpype/raw/master/docs/images/command_line.svg)

This pipeline uses five commands (in bold):
- [`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read) loads geometries from a SVG file.
- [`linemerge`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linemerge) merges paths whose extremities are close to each other (within the provided tolerance).
- [`linesort`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesort) reorder paths such as to minimise the pen-up travel.
- [`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop), well, crops.
- [`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write) export the resulting geometries to a SVG file.

There are many more commands available in *vpype*, see the [overview](#feature-overview) below.

Some commands have arguments, which are always required (in italic). For example, a file path must be provided to the
[`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read) command and dimensions must be provided to the [`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop) commands. A command may also have options which are, well,
optional. In this example, `--page-size a4` means that the [`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write) command will generate a A4-sized SVG (otherwise it
would have the same size as _in.svg_). Likewise, because `--center` is used, the [`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write) command will center geometries
on the page before saving the SVG (otherwise the geometries would have been left at their original location).


## Examples

**Note**: although it is not required, commands are separated by multiple spaces for clarity in the following examples.

Load an SVG file, scale it to a specific size, and export it centered on an A4-sized, ready-to-plot SVG file:
```
vpype  read input.svg  scaleto 10cm 10cm  write --page-size a4 --center output.svg
```

Optimize paths to reduce plotting time (merge connected lines and sort them to minimize pen-up distance):
```
vpype  read input.svg  linemerge --tolerance 0.1mm  linesort  write output.svg
```

Visualize the path structure of large SVG files, showing whether lines are properly joined or not thanks to a colorful
display:
```
vpype  read input.svg  show --colorful
```

Load several SVG files and save them as a single, multi-layer SVG file (e.g. for multicolored drawings):
```
vpype  read -l 1 input1.svg  read -l 2 input2.svg  write output.svg
```

Create arbitrarily-sized, grid-like designs like this page's top banner:
```
vpype  begin  grid -o 1cm 1cm 10 13  script alien_letter.py  scaleto 0.5cm 0.5cm  end  show
```

Export to HPGL for vintage plotters:
```
vpype  read input.svg  write --device hp7475a --page-size a4 --landscape --center output.hpgl
```
  
## What _vpype_ isn't?

_vpype_ caters to plotter generative art and does not aim to be a general purpose (think
Illustrator/InkScape) vector graphic tools. One of the main reason for this is the fact _vpype_ converts everything 
curvy (circles, bezier curves, etc.) to lines made of small segments. _vpype_ also dismisses the stroke and fill
properties (color, line width, etc.) of the imported graphics. These design choices make possible _vpype_'s rich feature
set, but makes its use for, e.g., printed media limited. 
 
 
## Installation

For Windows, an installer is available [here](https://github.com/abey79/vpype/releases) (note: plug-ins cannot be installed
when using this installation method).

For other platforms, and when plug-ins are required, *vpype* can be installed from the [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org)
using the following command:

```bash
pip install vpype
```

Python must previously be installed. Python version 3.8 is recommended to use *vpype*, although it is also compatible with Python 3.6 and 3.7. Python 3.9 should be avoided for the time being due to the lack of binary distribution for several dependencies.

For Linux, install Python with your OS's default package manager. For macOS, Python is best installed from either
[MacPorts](https://www.macports.org) or [Homebrew](https://brew.sh). For Windows, use the
[official installer](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

Check [the documentation](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/install.html) for more details, in particular on how to use a virtual environment (recommended).


## Documentation

The _vpype_ CLI includes its own, detailed documentation:

```bash
vpype --help          # general help and command list
vpype COMMAND --help  # help for a specific command
``` 

In addition, the [online documentation](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) provides extensive background
information on the fundamentals behind _vpype_, a cookbook covering most common tasks, the _vpype_ API documentation,
and much more.


## Feature overview

#### General

- Easy to use **CLI** interface with integrated help (`vpype --help`and `vpype COMMAND --help`) and support for arbitrary units (e.g. `vpype read input.svg translate 3cm 2in`).
- First-class **multi-layer support** with global or per-layer processing (e.g. `vpype COMMANDNAME --layer 1,3`) and layer edition commands ([`lmove`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#lmove), [`lcopy`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#lcopy), [`ldelete`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#ldelete)).
- Powerful hardware-accelerated **display** command with adjustable units, optional per-line coloring, optional pen-up trajectories display and per-layer visibility control ([`show`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#show)).
- Geometry **statistics** extraction ([`stat`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#stat)).
- Support for  **command history** recording (`vpype -H [...]`)
- Support for **RNG seed** configuration for generative plug-ins (`vpype -s 37 [...]`).


#### Input/Output

- Single- and multi-layer **SVG input** with adjustable precision, parallel processing for large SVGs, and supports percent or missing width/height ([`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read)).
- Support for **SVG output** with fine layout control (page size and orientation, centering), layer support with custom layer names, optional display of pen-up trajectories, various option for coloring ([`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write)).
- Support for **HPGL output** config-based generation of HPGL code with fine layout control (page size and orientation, centering).


#### Layout and transforms

- Powerful **transform** commands for scaling, translating, skewing and rotating geometries ([`scale`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#scale), [`translate`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#translate), [`skew`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#skew), [`rotate`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#rotate)).
- Support for **scaling** and **cropping** to arbitrary dimensions ([`scaleto`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#scaleto), [`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop)).
- Support for **trimming** geometries by an arbitrary amount ([`trim`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#trim)).
- Arbitrary **page size** definition ([`pagesize`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#pagesize)). 


#### Plotting optimization

- **Line merging** with optional path reversal and configurable merging threshold ([`linemerge`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linemerge)).
- **Line sorting** with optional path reversal ([`linesort`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesort)).
- **Line simplification** with adjustable accuracy ([`linesimplify`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesimplify)).
- Support for **splitting** all lines to their constituent segments ([`splitall`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#splitall)).
- Closed paths' **seam location randomization**, to reduce the visibility of pen-up/pen-down artifacts ([`reloop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#reloop)).
- Support for generating **multiple passes** on each line ([`multipass`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#multipass)).
- Support for **filtering** by line lengths or closed-ness ([`filter`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#filter)).
- Support for **reversing** order of paths within their layers ([`reverse`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#reverse)).
 
 #### Generation
 
 - Generation of arbitrary **primitives** including lines, rectangles, circles, ellipses and arcs ([`line`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#line), [`rect`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#rect), [`circle`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#circle), [`ellipse`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#ellipse), [`arc`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#arc)).
 - Generation of grid-like layouts ([`grid`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#grid)).
 - Generation of a **frame** around the geometries ([`frame`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#frame)).
 - Generation of random lines for debug/learning purposes ([`random`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#random))

#### Extensibility and API

 - First-class support for **plug-in** extensions (e.g [vpype-text](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-text), [hatched](https://github.com/abey79/hatched), [occult](https://github.com/LoicGoulefert/occult)).
 - Support for **script-based** generation ([`script`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#script)).
 - Powerful and [well-documented](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api.html) **API** for plug-ins and other plotter generative art projects.
 
 
 ## Contributing

Contributions to this project are welcome and do not necessarily require software development skills! Check the
[Contributing section](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/contributing.html) of the documentation for more
information.  


## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Added `layout` command (#168)
Other misc changes:
- added test for all commands (one line, one degenerate line)
- fixed scaleto for degenerate cases
- doc: added a workaround to recommonmark to avoid spurious warnings

README.md, after:

![banner](https://github.com/abey79/vpype/raw/master/docs/images/banner.png)


# _vpype_

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/vpype?label=PyPI&logo=pypi)](https://pypi.org/project/vpype/)
![python](https://img.shields.io/github/languages/top/abey79/vpype)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/abey79/vpype)](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/license.html)
![Test](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/abey79/vpype/Lint%20and%20Tests?label=Tests&logo=github)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/abey79/vpype/branch/master/graph/badge.svg?token=CE7FD9D6XO)](https://codecov.io/gh/abey79/vpype)
[![Sonarcloud Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=abey79_vpype&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=abey79_vpype)
[![Documentation Status](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/vpype?label=Read%20the%20Docs&logo=read-the-docs)](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

_vpype_ is the Swiss-Army-knife command-line tool for plotter vector graphics.

#### Contents

* [What _vpype_ is?](#what-vpype-is)
* [How does it work?](#how-does-it-work)
* [Examples](#examples)
* [What _vpype_ isn't?](#what-vpype-isnt)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Documentation](#documentation)
* [Feature overview](#feature-overview)
    * [General](#general)
    * [Input/Output](#inputoutput)
    * [Layout and transforms](#layout-and-transforms)
    * [Plotting optimization](#plotting-optimization)
    * [Generation](#generation)
    * [Extensibility and API](#extensibility-and-api)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [License](#license)


## What _vpype_ is?

_vpype_ is the Swiss-Army-knife command-line tool for plotter vector graphics. Here is what it can do:
 - **laying out** existing vector files with precise control on position, scale and page format;
 - **optimizing** existing SVG files for faster and cleaner plots;
 - creating **HPGL output** for vintage plotters;
 - creating **generative artwork** through built-in commands or plug-ins;
 - creating, modifying and processing **multi-layer vector files** for multi-colour plots;
 - and much more...
 
_vpype_ is highly **extensible** through [plug-ins](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/vpype.html#module-vpype) that
can greatly extend its capabilities. For example, plug-ins already exists for plotting
[pixel art](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-pixelart), [half-toning with hatches](https://github.com/abey79/hatched),
[plotting text](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-text) with Hershey fonts,
applying [hidden line removal](https://github.com/LoicGoulefert/occult), and much more.  

_vpype_ is also a [well documented](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api.html) **Python library**
useful to create generative art and tools for plotters. It includes data structures, utility and I/O functions, as well as
a hardware-accelerated flexible viewer for vector graphics. For example, the plotter generative art environment
[vsketch](https://github.com/abey79/vsketch) is built upon _vpype_.

Check the [documentation](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for a more thorough introduction to _vpype_.

## How does it work?

_vpype_ works by building so-called _pipelines_ of _commands_, where each command's output is fed to the next command's input.
Some commands load geometries into the pipeline (e.g. the [`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read)
command which loads geometries from a SVG file). Other commands modify these geometries, e.g. by cropping
them ([`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop)) or reordering them to minimize pen-up
travels ([`linesort`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesort)). Finally, some other commands
just read the geometries in the pipeline for display purposes ([`show`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#show))
or output to file ([`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write)).

Pipeline are defined using the _vpype_'s CLI (command-line interface) in a terminal by typing `vpype` followed by the
list of commands, each with their optional parameters and their arguments:

![command line](https://github.com/abey79/vpype/raw/master/docs/images/command_line.svg)

This pipeline uses five commands (in bold):
- [`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read) loads geometries from a SVG file.
- [`linemerge`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linemerge) merges paths whose extremities are close to each other (within the provided tolerance).
- [`linesort`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesort) reorder paths such as to minimise the pen-up travel.
- [`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop), well, crops.
- [`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write) export the resulting geometries to a SVG file.

There are many more commands available in *vpype*, see the [overview](#feature-overview) below.

Some commands have arguments, which are always required (in italic). For example, a file path must be provided to the
[`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read) command and dimensions must be provided to the [`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop) commands. A command may also have options which are, well,
optional. In this example, `--page-size a4` means that the [`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write) command will generate a A4-sized SVG (otherwise it
would have the same size as _in.svg_). Likewise, because `--center` is used, the [`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write) command will center geometries
on the page before saving the SVG (otherwise the geometries would have been left at their original location).


## Examples

**Note**: although it is not required, commands are separated by multiple spaces for clarity in the following examples.

Load an SVG file, scale it to a specific size, and export it centered on an A4-sized, ready-to-plot SVG file:
```
vpype  read input.svg  scaleto 10cm 10cm  write --page-size a4 --center output.svg
```

Optimize paths to reduce plotting time (merge connected lines and sort them to minimize pen-up distance):
```
vpype  read input.svg  linemerge --tolerance 0.1mm  linesort  write output.svg
```

Visualize the path structure of large SVG files, showing whether lines are properly joined or not thanks to a colorful
display:
```
vpype  read input.svg  show --colorful
```

Load several SVG files and save them as a single, multi-layer SVG file (e.g. for multicolored drawings):
```
vpype  read -l 1 input1.svg  read -l 2 input2.svg  write output.svg
```

Create arbitrarily-sized, grid-like designs like this page's top banner:
```
vpype  begin  grid -o 1cm 1cm 10 13  script alien_letter.py  scaleto 0.5cm 0.5cm  end  show
```

Export to HPGL for vintage plotters:
```
vpype  read input.svg  write --device hp7475a --page-size a4 --landscape --center output.hpgl
```
  
## What _vpype_ isn't?

_vpype_ caters to plotter generative art and does not aim to be a general purpose (think
Illustrator/InkScape) vector graphic tools. One of the main reason for this is the fact _vpype_ converts everything 
curvy (circles, bezier curves, etc.) to lines made of small segments. _vpype_ also dismisses the stroke and fill
properties (color, line width, etc.) of the imported graphics. These design choices make possible _vpype_'s rich feature
set, but makes its use for, e.g., printed media limited. 
 
 
## Installation

For Windows, an installer is available [here](https://github.com/abey79/vpype/releases) (note: plug-ins cannot be installed
when using this installation method).

For other platforms, and when plug-ins are required, *vpype* can be installed from the [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org)
using the following command:

```bash
pip install vpype
```

Python must previously be installed. Python version 3.8 is recommended to use *vpype*, although it is also compatible with Python 3.6 and 3.7. Python 3.9 should be avoided for the time being due to the lack of binary distribution for several dependencies.

For Linux, install Python with your OS's default package manager. For macOS, Python is best installed from either
[MacPorts](https://www.macports.org) or [Homebrew](https://brew.sh). For Windows, use the
[official installer](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

Check [the documentation](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/install.html) for more details, in particular on how to use a virtual environment (recommended).


## Documentation

The _vpype_ CLI includes its own, detailed documentation:

```bash
vpype --help          # general help and command list
vpype COMMAND --help  # help for a specific command
``` 

In addition, the [online documentation](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) provides extensive background
information on the fundamentals behind _vpype_, a cookbook covering most common tasks, the _vpype_ API documentation,
and much more.


## Feature overview

#### General

- Easy to use **CLI** interface with integrated help (`vpype --help`and `vpype COMMAND --help`) and support for arbitrary units (e.g. `vpype read input.svg translate 3cm 2in`).
- First-class **multi-layer support** with global or per-layer processing (e.g. `vpype COMMANDNAME --layer 1,3`) and layer edition commands ([`lmove`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#lmove), [`lcopy`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#lcopy), [`ldelete`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#ldelete)).
- Powerful hardware-accelerated **display** command with adjustable units, optional per-line coloring, optional pen-up trajectories display and per-layer visibility control ([`show`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#show)).
- Geometry **statistics** extraction ([`stat`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#stat)).
- Support for  **command history** recording (`vpype -H [...]`)
- Support for **RNG seed** configuration for generative plug-ins (`vpype -s 37 [...]`).


#### Input/Output

- Single- and multi-layer **SVG input** with adjustable precision, parallel processing for large SVGs, and supports percent or missing width/height ([`read`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#read)).
- Support for **SVG output** with fine layout control (page size and orientation, centering), layer support with custom layer names, optional display of pen-up trajectories, various option for coloring ([`write`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#write)).
- Support for **HPGL output** config-based generation of HPGL code with fine layout control (page size and orientation, centering).


#### Layout and transforms

- Easy and flexible **layout** command for centring and fitting to margin with selectable le horizontal and vertical alignment
  ([`layout`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#layout)).
- Powerful **transform** commands for scaling, translating, skewing and rotating geometries ([`scale`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#scale), [`translate`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#translate), [`skew`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#skew), [`rotate`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#rotate)).
- Support for **scaling** and **cropping** to arbitrary dimensions ([`scaleto`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#scaleto), [`crop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#crop)).
- Support for **trimming** geometries by an arbitrary amount ([`trim`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#trim)).
- Arbitrary **page size** definition ([`pagesize`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#pagesize)). 


#### Plotting optimization

- **Line merging** with optional path reversal and configurable merging threshold ([`linemerge`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linemerge)).
- **Line sorting** with optional path reversal ([`linesort`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesort)).
- **Line simplification** with adjustable accuracy ([`linesimplify`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#linesimplify)).
- Support for **splitting** all lines to their constituent segments ([`splitall`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#splitall)).
- Closed paths' **seam location randomization**, to reduce the visibility of pen-up/pen-down artifacts ([`reloop`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#reloop)).
- Support for generating **multiple passes** on each line ([`multipass`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#multipass)).
- Support for **filtering** by line lengths or closed-ness ([`filter`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#filter)).
- Support for **reversing** order of paths within their layers ([`reverse`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#reverse)).
 
 #### Generation
 
 - Generation of arbitrary **primitives** including lines, rectangles, circles, ellipses and arcs ([`line`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#line), [`rect`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#rect), [`circle`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#circle), [`ellipse`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#ellipse), [`arc`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#arc)).
 - Generation of grid-like layouts ([`grid`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#grid)).
 - Generation of a **frame** around the geometries ([`frame`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#frame)).
 - Generation of random lines for debug/learning purposes ([`random`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#random))

#### Extensibility and API

 - First-class support for **plug-in** extensions (e.g [vpype-text](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-text), [hatched](https://github.com/abey79/hatched), [occult](https://github.com/LoicGoulefert/occult)).
 - Support for **script-based** generation ([`script`](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference.html#script)).
 - Powerful and [well-documented](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api.html) **API** for plug-ins and other plotter generative art projects.
 
 
 ## Contributing

Contributions to this project are welcome and do not necessarily require software development skills! Check the
[Contributing section](https://vpype.readthedocs.io/en/stable/contributing.html) of the documentation for more
information.  


## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
