docs/install.rst, before:

.. _install:

============
Installation
============

This page explain how to install *vpype* for end-users. If you intend to develop on *vpype*, refer to the the :ref:`contributing` section.


macOS
=====

.. highlight:: bash

While macOS ships with a version of Python, this has been deprecated by Apple and may change in future version. Instead, you should install Python (3.8 recommended, 3.6 minimum, avoid using Python 3.9), either from `MacPorts <https://www.macports.org>`_ or from `Homebrew <https://brew.sh>`_.

Use the following commands for Homebrew::

  $ brew install python@3.8

And for MacPorts::

  $ sudo port install python38

Then, the preferred way to install *vpype* is in a dedicated `virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_. Follow these steps to do so::

  $ python3 -m venv vpype_venv      # create a new virtual environment
  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate  # activate the newly created virtual environment
  $ pip install --upgrade pip
  $ pip install vpype

You should now be able to run *vpype*::

  $ vpype --help

Each time a new terminal window is opened, the virtual environment must be activated using::

  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate

Alternatively, *vpype* can be executed using the full path to the executable::

  $ /path/to/vpype_venv/bin/vpype --help


Windows
=======

.. highlight:: bat

Python 3.8 is recommended for *vpype*, although it is also compatible with Python 3.6 and 3.7. At this stage, using Python 3.9 is discouraged because several of *vpype*'s dependencies are still lacking a binary distribution for this version. The official Python distribution for Windows can be downloaded `here <https://www.python.org/downloads/>`_

After installing Python, launch a terminal (by typing ``cmd`` in the Start menu) and enter the following command to install *vpype*::

  > pip install vpype

You should then be able to run *vpype*::

  > vpype --help

Installing in a virtual environment
-----------------------------------

`Virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_ are used to isolate the dependencies of one project from the the rest of your Python installation. Unless your Python installation is essentially dedicated to *vpype*, installing it in a virtual environment rather than in the global scope is preferable to avoid interferences.

To create a virtual environment for your *vpype* installation, launch the ``cmd`` terminal and enter the following commands::

  > python -m venv vpype_venv

This will create a ``vpype_venv`` directory which will contain everything needed to run *vpype*. Before using an environment, you need to activate it::

  > vpype_venv\Scripts\activate.bat

You will need to activate your virtual environment each time you launch a new  terminal. With your virtual environment activated, type the following command to install *vpype*::

  > pip install vpype

You should now be able to use *vpype*. Type this for a list of command::

  > vpype --help

This command should open a window showing a circle::

  > vpype circle 0 0 10cm show

If you can see it, your installation is up and running!


Linux
=====

.. highlight:: bash

*vpype* requires Python 3.6 or later. On Debian/ubuntu flavored installation, installing Python is a matter of::

  $ sudo apt-get install python3 python3-pip

The preferred way to install *vpype* is in a dedicated `virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_. Follow these steps to do so::

  $ python3 -m venv vpype_venv      # create a new virtual environment
  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate  # activate the newly created virtual environment
  $ pip install --upgrade pip
  $ pip install vpype

You should now be able to run *vpype*::

  $ vpype --help

Each time a new terminal window is opened, the virtual environment must be activated using::

  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate

Alternatively, *vpype* can be executed using the full path to the executable::

  $ /path/to/vpype_venv/bin/vpype --help


Raspberry Pi
============

.. highlight:: bash

Installing *vpype* on Raspbian is similar to Linux, but a number of libraries must be installed beforehand::

  $ sudo apt-get install git python3-shapely python3-scipy python3-dev

Also, the following command must be added to the ``~/.bashrc`` file for *vpype* to execute correctly::

  export LD_PRELOAD=/usr/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf/libatomic.so.1

Commit message:

Build an installer for Windows (#120)
* Added script to run PyInstaller
* Added NSIS script for the installer
* Integrated in the CI
* Integrated in the release pipeline
* Updated docs and added change log in doc (fixes #123)

docs/install.rst, after:

.. _install:

============
Installation
============

This page explain how to install *vpype* for end-users. If you intend to develop on *vpype*, refer to the the :ref:`contributing` section.


macOS
=====

.. highlight:: bash

While macOS ships with a version of Python, this has been deprecated by Apple and may change in future version. Instead, you should install Python (3.8 recommended, 3.6 minimum, avoid using Python 3.9), either from `MacPorts <https://www.macports.org>`_ or from `Homebrew <https://brew.sh>`_.

Use the following commands for Homebrew::

  $ brew install python@3.8

And for MacPorts::

  $ sudo port install python38

Then, the preferred way to install *vpype* is in a dedicated `virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_. Follow these steps to do so::

  $ python3 -m venv vpype_venv      # create a new virtual environment
  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate  # activate the newly created virtual environment
  $ pip install --upgrade pip
  $ pip install vpype

You should now be able to run *vpype*::

  $ vpype --help

Each time a new terminal window is opened, the virtual environment must be activated using::

  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate

Alternatively, *vpype* can be executed using the full path to the executable::

  $ /path/to/vpype_venv/bin/vpype --help


Windows
=======

.. highlight:: bat

A Windows installer is available `here <https://github.com/abey79/vpype/releases>`__. Although this installation method is easier, it does not allow plug-ins to be installed. If plug-ins are required, an installation from  the `Python Package Index <https://pypi.org>` is recommended.

Python 3.8 is recommended for *vpype*, although it is also compatible with Python 3.6 and 3.7. At this stage, using Python 3.9 is discouraged because several of *vpype*'s dependencies are still lacking a binary distribution for this version. The official Python distribution for Windows can be downloaded `here <https://www.python.org/downloads/>`__.

After installing Python, launch a terminal (by typing ``cmd`` in the Start menu) and enter the following command to install *vpype*::

  > pip install vpype

You should then be able to run *vpype*::

  > vpype --help

Installing in a virtual environment
-----------------------------------

`Virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_ are used to isolate the dependencies of one project from the the rest of your Python installation. Unless your Python installation is essentially dedicated to *vpype*, installing it in a virtual environment rather than in the global scope is preferable to avoid interferences.

To create a virtual environment for your *vpype* installation, launch the ``cmd`` terminal and enter the following commands::

  > python -m venv vpype_venv

This will create a ``vpype_venv`` directory which will contain everything needed to run *vpype*. Before using an environment, you need to activate it::

  > vpype_venv\Scripts\activate.bat

You will need to activate your virtual environment each time you launch a new  terminal. With your virtual environment activated, type the following command to install *vpype*::

  > pip install vpype

You should now be able to use *vpype*. Type this for a list of command::

  > vpype --help

This command should open a window showing a circle::

  > vpype circle 0 0 10cm show

If you can see it, your installation is up and running!


Linux
=====

.. highlight:: bash

*vpype* requires Python 3.6 or later. On Debian/ubuntu flavored installation, installing Python is a matter of::

  $ sudo apt-get install python3 python3-pip

The preferred way to install *vpype* is in a dedicated `virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_. Follow these steps to do so::

  $ python3 -m venv vpype_venv      # create a new virtual environment
  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate  # activate the newly created virtual environment
  $ pip install --upgrade pip
  $ pip install vpype

You should now be able to run *vpype*::

  $ vpype --help

Each time a new terminal window is opened, the virtual environment must be activated using::

  $ source vpype_venv/bin/activate

Alternatively, *vpype* can be executed using the full path to the executable::

  $ /path/to/vpype_venv/bin/vpype --help


Raspberry Pi
============

.. highlight:: bash

Installing *vpype* on Raspbian is similar to Linux, but a number of libraries must be installed beforehand::

  $ sudo apt-get install git python3-shapely python3-scipy python3-dev

Also, the following command must be added to the ``~/.bashrc`` file for *vpype* to execute correctly::

  export LD_PRELOAD=/usr/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf/libatomic.so.1
